docs/installation.md, before:

# Installation

Echopraxia is divided into two sections: the user logger APIs (`logger`, `fluent`, `semantic`) and an 
underlying `CoreLogger` implementation which is tied to the logging framework.  

You will need to install both, although in 99% of cases you will want `logger`:
Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>logger</artifactId>
  <version>VERSION</version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:logger:<VERSION>" 
```

There are core loggers for Logback, Log4J2, and JUL.

## Logstash Core Logger

There is a Logback implementation based around [logstash-logback-encoder](https://github.com/logfellow/logstash-logback-encoder).  This library does not provide a front end logger API, so you must pick (or create) one yourself, i.e. normal, async, fluent, or semantic.  

Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>logstash</artifactId>
  <version><VERSION></version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:logstash:<VERSION>" 
```

There are a couple of features that are Logback specific, such as the [logback converters(#logback-converters) and the direct Logback API.

## Log4J Core Logger

There is a Log4J implementation that works with the [JSON Template Layout](https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/manual/json-template-layout.html).  This provides a core logger implementation but does not provide a user visible logging API.

Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>log4j</artifactId>
  <version><VERSION></version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:log4j:<VERSION>" 
```

You will need to integrate the `com.tersesystems.echopraxia.log4j.layout` package into your `log4j2.xml` file, e.g. by using the `packages` attribute, and add an `EventTemplateAdditionalField` element:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<Configuration status="WARN" packages="com.tersesystems.echopraxia.log4j.layout">
    <Appenders>
        <Console name="Console" target="SYSTEM_OUT" follow="true">
            <JsonTemplateLayout eventTemplateUri="classpath:LogstashJsonEventLayoutV1.json">
                <EventTemplateAdditionalField
                        key="fields"
                        format="JSON"
                        value='{"$resolver": "echopraxiaFields"}'/>
            </JsonTemplateLayout>
        </Console>
    </Appenders>
    <Loggers>
        <Root level="info">
            <AppenderRef ref="Console" />
        </Root>
    </Loggers>
</Configuration>
```

If you want to separate the context fields from the argument fields, you can define them separately:

```xml
<JsonTemplateLayout eventTemplateUri="classpath:LogstashJsonEventLayoutV1.json">
    <EventTemplateAdditionalField
            key="arguments"
            format="JSON"
            value='{"$resolver": "echopraxiaArgumentFields"}'/>
    <EventTemplateAdditionalField
            key="context"
            format="JSON"
            value='{"$resolver": "echopraxiaContextFields"}'/>
</JsonTemplateLayout>
```

Unfortunately, I don't know of a way to "flatten" fields so that they show up on the root object instead of under an additional field.  If you know how to do this, let me know!

## JUL (java.util.logging) Core Logger

There is a JUL implementation.

Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>jul</artifactId>
  <version><VERSION></version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:jul:<VERSION>" 
```

You will probably want to configure JUL by calling `logManager.readConfiguration`:

```java
InputStream is;
try {
  is = getClass().getClassLoader().getResourceAsStream("logging.properties");
  LogManager manager = LogManager.getLogManager();
  manager.reset();
  manager.readConfiguration(is);
} finally {
  if (is != null) is.close();
}
```

JSON output is managed using a custom formatter `com.tersesystems.echopraxia.jul.JULJSONFormatter`:

```properties
handlers=java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler,java.util.logging.FileHandler

.level=FINEST

com.tersesystems.echopraxia.jul.JULJSONFormatter.use_slf4j_level_names=true

java.util.logging.FileHandler.formatter=com.tersesystems.echopraxia.jul.JULJSONFormatter
java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler.formatter=java.util.logging.SimpleFormatter
```

The `use_slf4j_level_names` property will map from JUL's levels to SLF4J, mapping `FINE` and `FINER` to `DEBUG` and `FINEST` to `TRACE`.

JUL's default class/method inference is disabled as it is not useful here and needlessly slows down logging.

Commit message:

Make logback and logstash dependencies compileOnly (#294)

docs/installation.md, after:

# Installation

Echopraxia is divided into two sections: the user logger APIs (`logger`, `fluent`, `semantic`) and an 
underlying `CoreLogger` implementation which is tied to the logging framework.  

You will need to install both, although in 99% of cases you will want `logger`:
Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>logger</artifactId>
  <version>VERSION</version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:logger:<VERSION>" 
```

There are core loggers for Logback, Log4J2, and JUL.

## Logstash Core Logger

There is a Logback implementation based around [logstash-logback-encoder](https://github.com/logfellow/logstash-logback-encoder).  This library does not provide a front end logger API, so you must pick (or create) one yourself, i.e. normal, async, fluent, or semantic.  

Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>logstash</artifactId>
  <version><VERSION></version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:logstash:<VERSION>"
```

Because Logback 1.2 is compiled with SLF4J 1.7.x and Logback 1.3 uses SLF4J 2.x, Echopraxia does not include the transitive dependencies.  Instead, you will need to select the appropriate Logback implementation:

For SLF4J 1.7.x:

```gradle
implementation "ch.qos.logback:logback-classic:1.2.12"
implementation 'net.logstash.logback:logstash-logback-encoder:7.3'
```

For SLF4J 2.0.x and for `logstash-logback-encoder` from 7.4:

```gradle
implementation "ch.qos.logback:logback-classic:1.4.6"
implementation 'net.logstash.logback:logstash-logback-encoder:7.4'
```

## Log4J Core Logger

There is a Log4J implementation that works with the [JSON Template Layout](https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/manual/json-template-layout.html).  This provides a core logger implementation but does not provide a user visible logging API.

Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>log4j</artifactId>
  <version><VERSION></version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:log4j:<VERSION>" 
```

You may want to explicitly define the Log4J dependencies as well:

```gradle
implementation "org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-core:$log4j2Version"
implementation "org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-api:$log4j2Version"
implementation "org.apache.logging.log4j:log4j-layout-template-json:$log4j2Version"
```

You will need to integrate the `com.tersesystems.echopraxia.log4j.layout` package into your `log4j2.xml` file, e.g. by using the `packages` attribute, and add an `EventTemplateAdditionalField` element:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<Configuration status="WARN" packages="com.tersesystems.echopraxia.log4j.layout">
    <Appenders>
        <Console name="Console" target="SYSTEM_OUT" follow="true">
            <JsonTemplateLayout eventTemplateUri="classpath:LogstashJsonEventLayoutV1.json">
                <EventTemplateAdditionalField
                        key="fields"
                        format="JSON"
                        value='{"$resolver": "echopraxiaFields"}'/>
            </JsonTemplateLayout>
        </Console>
    </Appenders>
    <Loggers>
        <Root level="info">
            <AppenderRef ref="Console" />
        </Root>
    </Loggers>
</Configuration>
```

If you want to separate the context fields from the argument fields, you can define them separately:

```xml
<JsonTemplateLayout eventTemplateUri="classpath:LogstashJsonEventLayoutV1.json">
    <EventTemplateAdditionalField
            key="arguments"
            format="JSON"
            value='{"$resolver": "echopraxiaArgumentFields"}'/>
    <EventTemplateAdditionalField
            key="context"
            format="JSON"
            value='{"$resolver": "echopraxiaContextFields"}'/>
</JsonTemplateLayout>
```

Unfortunately, I don't know of a way to "flatten" fields so that they show up on the root object instead of under an additional field.  If you know how to do this, let me know!

## JUL (java.util.logging) Core Logger

There is a JUL implementation.

Maven:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.tersesystems.echopraxia</groupId>
  <artifactId>jul</artifactId>
  <version><VERSION></version>
</dependency>
```

Gradle:

```gradle
implementation "com.tersesystems.echopraxia:jul:<VERSION>" 
```

You will probably want to configure JUL by calling `logManager.readConfiguration`:

```java
InputStream is;
try {
  is = getClass().getClassLoader().getResourceAsStream("logging.properties");
  LogManager manager = LogManager.getLogManager();
  manager.reset();
  manager.readConfiguration(is);
} finally {
  if (is != null) is.close();
}
```

JSON output is managed using a custom formatter `com.tersesystems.echopraxia.jul.JULJSONFormatter`:

```properties
handlers=java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler,java.util.logging.FileHandler

.level=FINEST

com.tersesystems.echopraxia.jul.JULJSONFormatter.use_slf4j_level_names=true

java.util.logging.FileHandler.formatter=com.tersesystems.echopraxia.jul.JULJSONFormatter
java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler.formatter=java.util.logging.SimpleFormatter
```

The `use_slf4j_level_names` property will map from JUL's levels to SLF4J, mapping `FINE` and `FINER` to `DEBUG` and `FINEST` to `TRACE`.

JUL's default class/method inference is disabled as it is not useful here and needlessly slows down logging.
